Justice Serenello interview, November 11, 1985.
All right, Lance,
will you donate this to Texas A&M University? Is
that OK? Yes. Thank you. Let me check.
But I talked to Stephanie. I listened to her tape a
couple of times, and I looked at her question, and
so I want to try to take off what she talked about.
She talked about some things that were pretty
broad, and I want to try to get into detail on a
couple of things. Sure. Plus ask some other
questions. First off, just for general
information, when and where were you born? I was
born August 4th, 1948 in Brooklyn, New York. I
understand you started school at City College in
New York in 67. Yes. And you came to Southwest in the
fall of 69. That's true. And then in the fall of 70,
you went back to City College in New York. And you
finished up there in June of 72. Yes. And when did
you attend law school and where? I attended law
school at the University of Texas at Austin from
September of 73 until May of 76. OK.
In the interview with Stephanie, you called the
Vietnam War a great disaster for the American
youth. When did your feelings against the war
begin, and when did they intensify? The feelings
against the war began, I would say, in 64, 65, when I
was still in high school. And the reason I saw the
war as not having any purpose It seemed like
something that we were caught up in, but yet we're
not able to advance any cause or help anyone, that
we were really advancing our own interests in
Southeast Asia. And I think as time went on, it
became more apparent it was not the kind of war, a
conventional war, that Americans were used to
fighting, where we would go in and win in a few
months or a year or so, and that we were becoming
hopelessly mired in something that basically
offered no expectation of a victory or something
that was satisfying from the point of view of the
American government. Well, apparently that's
what made you speak out against the war. You
mentioned in the other interview that you were
taught to question in high school. Do you think
that was part of it? Also, I take it your parents,
from what I understand in the interview, pretty
much conform to the authority. Right. They were
basically very authoritarian minded. They never
thought of questioning authority or they
basically believed in following whatever the
government policies were. And I think in high
school, I learned more about just questioning,
not accepting, and beginning to ask, why are we in
this war? What have we got to gain? What is our
purpose? And the more you ask those questions, I
think it became apparent that we really didn't
have a solid purpose in being there, and that the
government kept expanding our involvement. And
of course, I began to be of draft age and began to be
thinking as well from my own standpoint. I think a
lot of other people my age were thinking, well, we
might go over there and get killed. And what are we
doing it for? And many of us thought, this is not
right. There wasn't any purpose. At that point, I
remembered my history courses about World War II
and thought about what American youth were like in
the early 40s. And to me, there seemed to be a
distinct difference between then fighting
someone who had the potential of threatening our
freedom as opposed to what had we to fear from the
government of South Vietnam or North Vietnam?
What had the Americans had to fear? Surely, they
were not going to get in the boats come across to the
West Coast or get in planes. I mean, and things like
that, which at this point seem rather simple or
rather straightforward. Yet at that time, most
people were just unquestioned support of Vietnam
or the government. What kind of an upbringing did
you have? Did your parents punish you in any way
when you didn't go by what they said and you
questioned? Yeah, punishment was usually
corporal by spanking or slapping or taking away
privileges or things like that. I grew up in a
tenement in Brooklyn in the early 50s. So, I mean,
we were basically, by most standards, poor. And
there wasn't a whole lot they could take away, but
basically time to spend on the street playing.
What is your religion? I'm Catholic. You are
Catholic. Right. Also, from the high school, was
it because of your teachers, or was it because of
your peers where you were cross-questioned? I
think it was a combination of teachers and peers.
The high school I went to required an entrance exam
in New York City. It was one of three high schools
that you had to take an entrance exam to get into.
And generally, it was nearly everyone there went
on to college, and it was different from the
neighborhood high schools. Was it a private
school? No, it was a public school. Public?
Mm-hmm. But that was the only requirement Was it
close to your home? No, it was not. It was about an
hour subway ride from my home. The reason I went
there was because it was a very good high school.
Do you think some of the students that protested
the war, especially say in 69 when you were leading
a lot of them, do you think they did it because it was
bashing, they were just following the crowd, pick
up a chick, you know, I'm protesting, we'll get
some drugs, or do you think some of them sincerely
had reservations about the war and wanted to do
something about it? I think it's a combination. I
think there were certainly some people who were in
it because it was a fad or it was the cheap thing to do
at that time. But I think most people had genuine
reservations about the war and what was
happening. And people at that point in 69 knew of,
had friends who had either died in Vietnam or
injured in Vietnam, And in fact, one of the people
that I was kicked out of school with had been
Vietnam. And at that point in 69, you had a lot of
Vietnam veterans speaking out against the war.
And on the campus of Southwest, there were a number
of veterans who spoke out against it. And I think it
was more than just because it was fashionable,
although at this point in 69, demonstrations had
become somewhat fashionable. However, in
Southwest Texas State, they were not. The
demonstration that we had in October of 69 was the
first anti-war demonstration they ever had in
that town or that county. So on the 15th in
conjunction with Vietnam War? That's right. And
then the second one was in November when we were
suspended. I'll get more into that. You mentioned
in the other interview also that maybe 10% of the
students at any one time participated in
demonstrations. And so looking back, do you think
that was a good percentage, a good turnout? Or do
you think it could have done better? We thought it
was a good turnout then, because initially there
was very little support. And in the October
moratorium, there was a fair number of students
more than we had expected. And in November, it had
grown. And we thought that the turnout was
improving. you'd like to have had 100%. You don't
expect that. And at that point, given what was
going on in many campuses of the size and
temperament of San Marcos, I thought that was a
good turnout. And we certainly, in October, the
auditorium that we had for our speakers was
completely overflowing with people. In fact,
there were speakers outside for the people who
were sitting outside. Good job.
You said you were aware of your involvement, your
interest began in 64, 65. Was it just from watching
television? Were you aware of specific events,
such as, well, a couple instances that I noticed
doing research that were very important, such as
the spring mobilization and the war in April of 67,
the Rolling Thunder in 68, which started in 64 but
lasted until 68, which was just constant bombing
of North Vietnam by the American troops. Were
there particular instances that you could
isolate on? Well, I would say that a number of our
professors in high school or teachers encouraged
us to think about the war, about what was going on.
And I can't pinpoint any one thing, but I think it
was certainly some of the speakers that we had in
high school also encouraged us to think about the
war. Our valedictory speech in high school, the
valedictorian basically gave an anti-war
speech. And it just seemed that it was very
frequent in conversation, not just on
television, because television at that time, in
64, 65, was basically pro-administration. I
mean, there was some questioning of it, and there
was not a lot of any more sentiment, although there
was a fair amount growing in New York and some of the
major eastern cities. But it was still...
considered still very anti-government,
un-American, to have been against the war at that
time. How involved were you in your first two years
at City College? I was involved in some
demonstrations and some planning of
demonstrations with the committees up there and
the anti-war groups up there. But it was basically
a loose amalgam of organizations and activities.
It was not well organized.
Reading the article, it said that you liked the
Kentucky Hill Country and such. Is that all that
enticed you to transfer down to Santa Barbara?
That's right. One of my hobbies at that time was
skydiving. It still is. And I took a couple of weeks
in summer in college and just went around the
country skydiving. And St. Marcus had a nice gym
center. I thought the Hill Country was pretty, and
I decided to. I wanted to go just to a different kind
of school and pick Southwest Texas State. And
Texas at that time was inexpensive for
out-of-state students, and that was another
factor. Going down there then and starting your
junior year, did you expect or did you anticipate
what you were going to get involved in? No, I did not
expect that I would get. I thought I would be
involved in some anti-war activities. I assumed
that there would be some kind of existing ongoing
organization on campus and that I would
participate. But when I got there, I found out that
there really wasn't any such an entity. And
therefore, I proceeded to try and work with some
other people to try and get some anti-war activity
going, at least some mobilization and some effort
to express our feelings against the war. And this
is when you met in the coffee house and started the
ad hoc committee? That's right. Was that solely
your responsibility? Did you dream that up, or did
you run into these other eight individuals? Was it
all of your own meaning? I think it was a matter of
just, I wouldn't say it was solely my idea. It was
just something that we more or less decided to do
and form to get some organized activity against
the war on campus. These other eight, were they all
gentlemen? Were they all men? No. See, there were
three women and seven males. And actually,
several of them were not involved in the anti-war
activities really until that demonstration in
November. And of course, there were a lot of people
at the demonstration site. And once the
university came and roped off the area and said,
you've got three minutes to vacate, then many
people left. And it was just the 10 of us that
stayed. I don't know if you were aware of that.
Essentially, the way it happened is that we had
negotiated with the administration for a space on
the campus to have a demonstration. And at that
point, the administration said, no, we're not
going to let you have anything outside except in
what was called at that time the free speech area,
which was an area not centrally located on campus,
and you could only demonstrate for one hour. We had
the exact same thing. Do you? Okay. Well, we
consulted with some attorneys in Austin through
the American Civil Liberties Union. They advised
us that, in their opinion, they didn't think that
was constitutional, that we had a right to express
ourselves, you know, as long as we were not
obstructing traffic and not disturbing classes.
And so we then proceeded to hold the demonstration
on a grassy area and not make any noise. The
administration came down, roped off the area, and
said, you've got three minutes to leave or you'll
be suspended. And 10 of us stayed. And then they
suspended us. I mean, there were TV cameras there.
It was on the news that night. It was apparently. So
immediately you were suspended. And when was it
that the circuit judge? What happened was we were
suspended on November 9, or whenever it happened,
November. Was that November? Was it the 15th? Was
it the second moratorium? It was the second
moratorium, whatever that was. Maybe it was the
15th. In November, and then we were reinstated
about three weeks later by the Fifth Circuit Court
of Appeals. Judge Roberts in Austin denied our
request for reinstatement. The Fifth Circuit
granted our request, and therefore we were
allowed to continue in school until the end of the
school year. However, We were not granted any
credit. The university would not give us credit
until, you know, the issue was finally resolved on
the merits. And we lost on the merits. To the
Supreme Court in 72. What did you do those three
weeks that you were suspended? Were you still... I
was still involved in some anti-war activities or
just mobilizing, you know. There were some other
demonstrations. We had demonstrations about
people trying to convince the administration to
put us back in school. In fact, the night we got
suspended, there were probably as many as 3,000
students that attended the demonstration. And
many students, even those who were not against the
war, just felt like that was just excessive. It was
just unfair to throw us out of school for what we
did.
I take it when you were suspended, and then when you
were reinstated into school, it was about finals
time, then, wasn't it? Mm-hmm. Did you come back in
the spring semester? Yes, I did. But all this time,
even though the spring semester, all the time you
were taking classes, those credits, too, were
questionable. Right. Because the suspension
from the university was for one academic year.
Okay. And so, therefore, the university allowed
us to attend school. It would not produce any
credits. And so my transcript just reads one
paragraph from the Southwest Texas statement. It
cites the case and says that all credits denied.
And then after that, that's when we went back to
Citadel. What kind of a communication network did
you have going to reach your supporters? It was a
combination of telephones. We had a telephone
bank of people. We also had one person in each dorm
that was responsible for motivating or getting
people out or letting people know what was
happening. We had people in various parts of the
student community that lived in the town that
would basically be assigned to different areas.
And we then used notices that we would put around.
Such as flyers? Flyers, right. Where did you get
the funding for things like that? The owner of one
of the bookstores, Bob Barton,
was a legislator up until two years ago. He had been
a newspaperman in San Marcos. He supported us with
funding, donated money, and donated some
printing press materials. And you also had a
couple underground papers. That's right. We had
the Purgatory Creek Press. And there was the
Weather Report. Weather Report, that was it. Your
group and the organizers, were they in charge of
that, or just someone else? The Weather Report was
done by someone else, and the Purgatory Creek
Press was also done by some other people. In fact, a
journalism student who'd been removed off the
newspaper
was in charge of the Purgatory Creek Press. And
he's now, or was at one time, a city councilman in
St. Lawrence. And those publications, what would
be printed in those? They were mainly articles
about the warm Vietnam or about issues on the
campus regarding students or women. Women's
rights at that point was sort of an emerging issue.
I wish I I'm sure I've got copies of them somewhere,
they're just difficult
to locate. But they were pretty, in terms of the
reporting in the articles, they were not unbiased
by any means. They were quite slanted. And there
was a lot of hype and a lot of rhetoric. Did you all
ever read E.T.' 's Frag? Yeah. And did you have any
communication going with Moe or SNC? We did, and we
got some of the national and regional flyers and
brochures that were printed and put out. How would
you obtain that information? Did you contact them
and they'd mail it to you? We were in contact with
the Austin SMC office and then the Washington
office, but mainly through the Austin office. And
with your group, was there one person who was more
or less the president, the leader? Not really,
although, I mean, I didn't, you know, informally,
you know, attributed to being the leader. But I
think we all, you know, we all had, we were all quite
strong individuals. And it wasn't the kind of
group where nine of you followed one person and we
all had our own ideas. You know, and it was somewhat
diverse. We weren't monolithic in terms of our
viewpoint or outlook by any means. And I would say
that, you know, we were a, a loosely banded
together group of people, and there wasn't any one
particular leader. Although, again, I've been
attributed to that, to being the leader, or been
referred to as that, but I think everyone had
different ideas, and everyone had some important
ideas.
When did, going back to the Ad Hoc Committee, when
exactly did that start? Was it right at the
beginning of the... It was right at the beginning.
I'd say about Oh, the first week of September we
removed it. And were your main efforts in to get
ready for the first moratorium? Because the first
moratorium was coming about, and the idea was to
have some sort of campus-wide activity. And at
first the administration was very reluctant, but
they agreed to do it. And it was only after they got
all this negative response from people in the
community, alumni, whatever, that they really
tried to come down on us on the second one. What
happened with that first one? What did you do
exactly? We had Senator Schwartz at that time, I
believe. Well, we had some professors speak about
the war in Vietnam. And again, it was the
auditorium that we had was just overflowing with
people. That's where you had him? And that's all it
entailed, were speakers at the auditorium, no
marches, no sittings?
We had a short march, but it was not very lengthy.
But that was the extent. And we handed out flyers
and brochures, trying to encourage other people
to think about the war more.
When this was starting and you were getting
involved in 69, were you even up with the other
campuses across the country and what they were
doing? We were only mainly through the newspaper
and then through the, we'd occasionally attend
some regional meetings in Austin about what was
going on. But that was pretty much the extent of it.
You had the two moratoriums. Is there any other
demonstrations that you're involved in at
Southwest during your stay? There, I believe in
February we had another anti-war activity,
which, according to our, you know, basically
following the advice of our lawyers, we just
strictly followed the administration's
guidelines about the demonstration. We had a
demonstration in response to Kent State. That was
the vigil. The vigil, right. And then we also had a
demonstration regarding a foreign student that
the university was apparently trying to punish
for his political ideas.
I learned later, we had a march on the
administration building to the dean's office.
And I later learned that the dean thought we were
going to try and destroy records. And they hoarded
everything, all these safes closed or vaults
closed. It was just amazing. But we just marched to
the dean's office to talk to the dean about what was
happening to the students. So there were never any
draft card burnings, sit-ins, anything that was a
little more radical than just? No, nothing. more
radical, nothing where the wall was broken or
anything like that. That did not happen. And
basically, we thought that would not be a good step
to take, especially in light of the fact that we
were already involved in this litigation over the
suspension in November. I mean, it's quite
possible that if nothing had happened in
November, that we might have gone further and done
more, and there might have been some sit-ins. I
don't know whether there would have been draft
card burnings, but there might have been some
sit-ins. or something around that. But I think
there was an attempt, really, to try and stay
within the law. I just thought we had the upper hand
that way in trying not to do something that could
provoke the administration or give them grounds.
I mean, we were never arrested at the
demonstration. It was strictly a civil matter.
Never any arrests during the protests? No. Never
any arrests. It was closely monitored by the
police, but we never Well, what was the
administration's reason for asking you to leave?
They said that the demonstration was disrupting
the campus. And here we were being punished
because there were lots of people hollering and
yelling at us, you know, commies, you know, Yankee
agitator, and that sort of thing. And I assume it
probably was disruptive to certain classrooms,
but it wasn't us It was causing the disruption. We
were not saying anything. We were not blocking any
paths. But that was the administration's
reasoning. In fact, they had several professors
testify at the trial that their classrooms were
being disrupted by the noise. Of course, the
professors couldn't testify as to who was making
the noise because they didn't see it. But we had
testimony about who was making the noise and that
nothing was done to stop people who were making the
noise or disperse the crowd that was gathering.
So, I mean, from that standpoint, it's fairly
ludicrous to blame us for disrupting. I mean, we
were sitting on a grass knoll, just ten of us. I
mean, yeah, it's absurd at this point, but that's
the way the administration viewed it. And, of
course, they had Jack Roberts, who was the
district judge that heard the case at that time. He
was an LBJ appointee. After, you know, one minute,
of the case closing, he rendered a decision
against us. And it was just, pardon me, I mean,
you're taking it under your belt. So you think that
his decision was a little far? Yeah, his decision
was made up before he ever heard the avenues, I'm
sure. But, you know, we did not win the Fifth
Circuit on the trial of the merits. And when it went
up to the Supreme Court and lost at that point, so
sure it was denied. You know, the way the facts come
out in the case, and what I might try to do is get you a
copy of the opinion. It appears that we were not
being reasonable in our negotiations with the
administration. So there are some facts that
don't come out clearly. But we were trying to
negotiate. The administration just did not view
this as an embarrassment. It viewed the fact that
we, because a lot of the other schools in Texas on
the level of Southwest Texas State were not having
any demonstrations. And it was an embarrassment
to this administration their students were
protesting and demonstrating. The view was,
can't you, the administrators, stop these
people? Can't you do something to sweep them under
the rug? And so they were very upset. They were
determined to keep us from having a large
demonstration like we had in October. These
people that were yelling at you and such, were they
people from the community, other students? There
were other students, mainly cowboys, people who
just them raised in Texas with old backgrounds.
Did you ever get into any type of debates with, just
verbal debates back and forth and ask them why they
were... We had some verbal discussions, although
not, that day we had some, but it was mainly some
discussion, but it never really got anywhere. I
mean, there was some communication, but a lot of
them were fairly hostile. They saw this as the
Communist menace that they mourned about in
Sunday school and grammar school. I just felt like
I'd been cast back several years. It was amazing.
Were they all so primitive? Yes, they were
primitive in terms of their politics and
ideology. They were very dogmatic. It was just
incredible.
Over the course of the year, there was some
discussion.
the events of that year, the demonstrations,
provoked a lot of class discussion. And, you know,
I think people had a more open view of that. But
that's... I mean, there was some discussion.
What do you think it is that drives people to
protest? What is it just... Well, it's a
combination of things. I think one is just the
sense of morality of what's right and what's
wrong. That if the government is doing something
that's wrong, you as a citizen of that government
have an obligation to speak out against it. I think
that's one area. There's also, you know, where you
are directly involved, you know, where you're
likely to be drafted. That's a motivation,
particularly in regard to the Vietnam War. You
have a lot of different people. And there's also
Demonstrations were fashionable. It was the
wartime war. People meet each other, smoke a
little dope. And that took place, too. And that was
part of it all. They certainly didn't smoke dope at
demonstrations in southwest Texas. But that was
part of it, too. It's a combination of motives. But
I think that the morality of the war and the draft
were probably two main things. Which one do you
think was stronger, the fear of the draft or the
disagreement with government policy?
Unfortunately, I think the fear of the draft was
probably stronger. Although I would say many
people, the disagreement with government policy
was strong, but you had many people who, once the
draft was no longer a problem.
Let me rephrase that. People were not as concerned
about what was going on with the government in 72,
73, when I went back to Southwest Texas, when
students could then vote. I mean, they literally
could control that city, and yet they chose not to.
It just shocked me. And students, a lot of them were
voting Republican in 72. It was a disillusion
because they just did not have a real concern about
what their government was doing. The draft wasn't
as big a problem and they just sort of backed off.
What was the draft age at that time? It was 18. And
voting and drinking age is 21. Correct. In Texas,
right. How did you feel about that when they were
asking you to dock your country at 18 and yet you
couldn't speak with your vote for... Well, I
thought it was, of course, at that time, I had just
turned 21, so I could drink. But I still thought it
was inconsistent. I thought you shouldn't be in a
position where you can be called upon to fight for
your country, and you couldn't get a drink. Yeah, I
thought that was outrageous.
But you had a lot of people who were students, I
think, who were concerned about the draft. But
there was also this outrage about the war. Because
you also, as I say, by 69, And people had been seeing
it on television, had been watching the weekly
death counts. And people began asking
themselves, is this right? And I think that the
demonstrations were a catalyst that people
really began to articulate, or at least in their
own minds began to formulate that something was
not right. What was it that made you different from
everybody else that made you one of the leaders?
Well, I think part of it was a willingness to get
something going, to start an activity where there
was not an activity there. I guess it's just my own,
I was not willing to accept that there was not going
to be some activity or organization to mobilize
against the war in southwest Texas State.
I learned to question authority and not just
accept things. And it was an area where there was a
need for someone I mean, if there had been an
ongoing campus activity organization, I
probably would have participated, but would not
have assumed the role that I did. I think there was a
need, and there was a role available, and I wanted
to fulfill that role because someone needed
to do it. I understand. OK. Other such actions,
especially reading out to get involved in the 69,
the Tet Offensive, the arrests in Chicago, and
things like that. Did those inspire you even more
to voice your opinions to try to get something
better? I think they did. I think that there was a
feeling that the government was lying to us. The
government was really trying to clamp down any
kind of expression. And it made us very angry,
because we grew up thinking how wonderful the
government was. What a great country we've got, or
as you're told by your teachers, and that just
wasn't so. And you saw the extent to which the
government would go to try and suppress opinions
that were not in line with what the government
wanted to hear decisively articulate. Along that
line, Nixon
had his speech, November 3, 1969, to attack the
Trump 42nd. Do you hear that speech? Yes. said that
the enemy was at home, and he was making
accusations against all the students,
especially the students, and their protests and
stuff. How did you feel about that when he said
that? That made me even more angry, because I was
doing what I considered my right as an American,
which was to express my opinion, speak out,
exercise my free speech. And there was a president
saying, You don't have the right to do that, or I
don't want you doing that, because that speech
doesn't agree with what I think your opinion ought
to be. And that was the very kind of attitude that I
can only remember being told was the communist
countries, where they wouldn't let you speak out.
You had to always speak in favor of the government,
or whatever government line was being hoisted at
that point. So that was very upsetting. How did you
feel then about the silent majority and all the
others that conformed to the government? What
were your thoughts? feelings towards those
people? Well, my feelings were one of basically
anger and frustration that people would allow
themselves to be cowed into a way of thinking just
because the president or the government was
telling them, this is the way you should think.
This is the patriotic approach. And if you're a
patriot, you will do this. It was this blind
obedience to a line of policy that people were not
questioning. And that was upsetting. I thought
the greatest thing about this country was that you
could question, you could speak out. And that
people would, if they had some questions, or would
challenge the government. But here, people were
unwilling to do this. There was a real climate of
fear. People were afraid about jobs, about if they
spoke out, if they were perceived as dissidents.
And I think that was particularly so in 65, 66, and
so on. Do you think this was a result of the the
silent generation in the 50s and the conformity
during that period and the anti-communism
campaign. Yeah, I think Nixon effectively tried
to, and LBJ also, to evoke memories of McCarthy
when we were trying to keep the commies out, that
people who disagreed with the government policy
were communists, that you could not be a patriot
and disagree with government policy. I mean, that
was what they tried to promulgate as basically an
ideology that if you were a patriot, if you loved
this country, you had to support whatever the
government did. And that was very frightening,
because there were a lot of people who fought that.
And in many parts of this country at that point, you
were a communist, you were guilty of treason if you
spoke out against the Vietnam War. Do you think the
results of the war would have been different? Say
the war was in 59, intense in 59 instead of 69, and
looking at the people of that era, do you think that
the protests would have been strong, or do you
think there might not have even been any? It would
have been very weak protests. I mean, you probably
had some protests on campuses in some of the major
cities, but very, very few. Yeah, I think at that
point there would have been very little
opposition. What was it that made the 60s, in your
opinion, what made them different from the kids in
the 50s? Well, I think this unwillingness to just
accept things, a feeling that you just can't
blindly obey what the government has to tell you.
You can't just accept things. There's a feeling
that you can change things, you can make things
better.
I think a lot of us do very literally. Can we say,
yes, now what the country can do for you or what you
can do for your country? And part of it, I think, we
felt was that if the government's policy is wrong
or it's not what we believe to be correct, we've got
a right to speak out. In fact, we do need to speak
out. And I think that was more of what people in the
60s felt. You don't just accept it. Where, deep
down, do you think that ideology comes from? Is it
strictly from what Kennedy said? Was it because of
upbringing? Not so much. High school education? I
think perhaps education. I think it was more
having education, both high school and college,
where you, I think, professors perhaps had some,
particularly in the more difficult
universities, this idea of questioning
authority. And I think that's probably most with
it. You think it also? because of the intensity of
McCarthy and his campaigns. And since that had
died out, do you think that some of the braver
students were willing to speak out? Whereas if
they wanted to say something in the 50s, boy, they
would have thought twice. Well, I think in the 50s,
there was certainly a climate of fear of being
labeled a communist, where that would just ruin
your whole life, your whole career. Whereas in the
60s, it became, especially in the late 60s, It
became acceptable to voice opposition, and that
was not the end of the world for you. It would mean
you could never expect to have a family and live and
have a decent job or something. Whereas in the 50s,
I think that was part of it. People were very much
afraid of being labeled or branded something that
was decent. Excuse me one second. Yeah. Let's see
if we're about ready to... If you want this. Have
you ever thought about writing a book? No worries
about what happens. Well, I've thought about it.
I've got, you know, some of my notes and some of the
things in the newspapers and things somewhere.
And I've thought about that, but it's a question of
time. I've been involved since I've gotten out of
law school in building a practice, a fairly busy
practice, and it's just been very difficult. You
know, just time, making time for vacations or
getting away and relaxing when I'm out or
something like that.
You made
a
statement in the article that said, I want to be
free to represent those who can't afford an
attorney, especially those oppressed by the
government. And you mentioned in your first
interview that you saw part of the It's more
effective to be a part of the legal system. You
could question it easily, more easily, to be a part
of it. Along those lines,
is that the main reason? And I remember also you
saying that you'd always want to be a lawyer ever
since you were young. But you think because of what
happened to you that you decided, made your
decision to Yeah, I think so. After what I went
through in Southwest Texas State, I decided that I
would pursue a legal career. And the realization
that the legal system was society's way of
fighting, and it's an acceptable way of combat,
trying to bring about change. And so that's why I
decided to get into the legal system. And that more
gave me the interest to go forward with that
decision. We had a civil rights case now. think
back on the way your civil rights have been
violated, does that almost motivate you to try to?
I think that has some effect. I think about what's
happened to me and I think about what's happened to
my particular client at that time. And I can
relate, I can empathize with what people are going
through. And I think I have a good understanding of
what's happening with them. How many people have
you represented for free? Well, I'd say It's kind
of hard to put numbers on. I've done a fair amount
of, I've done some domestic relations work for
three to four people. I've done the civil rights
work and the police brutality type cases, which I
think have started out being for free. But because
we've been successful, the government has been
forced to pay attorneys for us. So that, it's kind
of hard to put a clear number. I've done quite a
number of police
brutality cases. where we've been successful,
you know, the city or the county, and I've done some
in some rural counties around this area, have had
to pay and put the expense. Of course, when I
haven't won, then I've had to bear the expenses. Do
you think you've been pretty effective so far?
Well, I think I've been effective with the
representation in the area of civil rights
because
it's resulted in One of the early ones I brought in
Liberty County resulted in a complete revamping
of their whole procedure and system, and also in
firing some deputies. And this last election in
Liberty County, there was a lot of focus on someone
that I'm representing and on the policy of the
sheriff. And the sheriff ended up losing his job.
And the county is now trying to settle the lawsuit
with us. I have represented an inmate who was
beaten up by a jailer. And the jailer was later
prosecuted
for what he did. But it can bring about some
effective changes. Not all the time. And the civil
rights area is frustrating, too, because people
tend to believe police officers more than
citizens. And there are very many cases that I just
cannot take, just from the sheer volume of time
that any one case takes. And unfortunately,
sometimes you don't take a case because there's
just not enough damages to make it worthwhile to
pursue.
But I guess the frustration is that there needs to
be more people involved and more time spent, and
one person only has so
much time. The other people in your group, the
other nine, ten people, did any of those people
pursue law? No, none of them did. One's a librarian
in Austin, Illinois. One is a school teacher in San
Antonio. One is a nurse in New Mexico. One owns a
clothing store in San Marcos, or head shop, I guess
is the name. Head shop or clothing store. Another
is a social worker. another as an art teacher, and
another as a piano tutor. We had a reunion back in
1979 after 10 years, and we had a get-together last
year. We've all gone different ways, but
politically I think we're all All of us probably
voted for liberal Democratic candidates last
year. Only one of them voted
for Reagan. Okay. One second. I think it's about
time. Okay. Yeah, we'll do that.